welcome to topcast and episode 7 or
question 7 of my series of questions
with david deutsch this is a question
that actually follows directly on from
episode 1 or the first question that i
gave to david deutch about the reality
of abstractions one particular special
kind of abstraction is the laws of
physics the laws of physics are a kind
of abstraction after all they're not
made out of physical stuff so whether or
not they're just in the class of
abstractions themselves or there's
something different entirely we don't
really know we don't really know what
the nature of the laws of physics are
this has led among other things to some
people philosophers
to deny the actual existence of laws of
physics they say things like well
they're just conjunctions of events
aren't there you know this thing happens
and that thing happens but to infer to
take the extra step to say there's some
sort of law of physics
governing prescribing describing
something like that
supervening on top of all of the
material stuff in the universe that's a
step too far what you're doing there is
you're just using your imagination to
think into existence something that
doesn't have a real independent
existence all on its own all there are
are the events the events that you can
see and hear and feel and touch the
things that you can observe and as you
will hear david say here the crucial
part about that kind of argument is that
it always presumes that the one thing
that does exist
are either the observations which you
have direct access to or the things in
themselves that you're actually
observing with your senses so there's
always some sort of spurious empiricist
type assumption
sneaking in to these arguments that deny
the existence of things like the laws of
physics and using that kind of argument
you deny the existence of anything as
people do people go the whole hog and
just deny the reality of abstractions
they just say that the fundamental
particles exist
again that presumes that what they've
got access to their observations are
somehow
not able to be mistaken and yet we know
that of course we make mistakes all the
time errors creep into our observations
observations are theory laden what we
have access to are ideas ideas come
first theories come first and then using
those theories we are then able to
figure out what the observations mean so
why do we say the laws of physics exist
because they're part of the explanation
they're part of an explanation that we
are forced to accept if we want to try
and understand the world they're our
best attempt to understand what's going
on in the world there are things about
whose existence there's rarely any
debate released almost simultaneously
with this is the conversation that i had
some months back with christopher part
two of my conversation with christopher
of the do explain podcast and in that
podcast we do discuss the nature of
existence and i bring up at one point i
think the example of
cats carrots and cars just to name three
things about which there's rarely any
debate that these things exist unless of
course you go along to an undergraduate
philosophy class and then people start
complaining about whether or not tables
exist for example and they start banging
the table to say does it really exist or
just do the atoms exist
some people do deny not only the reality
of abstractions but they also deny the
reality of anything that's emergent and
say well it's just fundamental particles
this seems to deny the emergent
simplicity of things a cat is not just
the random motion of atoms or particles
in the void it's an organized structure
obeying laws emergent laws like
laws of evolution by natural selection
for example
that are not easily accounted for
by a simple description or explanation
of the predictive laws of physics so we
say these things exist things exist
insofar as they appear in our deepest
explanations of reality and there are
lots of different levels of explanations
of reality there's the emergent kind
there's the fundamental foundational
kind out of which the particles consist
there's the explanations of abstractions
there's also some problematic things as
well so for example we say that
consciousness exists we say that free
will exists because both of these things
appear in imperfect granted imperfect
explanations of the world but to do away
with them would be to do away even with
the best explanation that we have with
so many open questions of those
particular things now some people might
say well if you're invoking something
like consciousness why not invoke
something like a ghost why not just
start believing in ghosts we can't
observe consciousness can we in the same
way we can't observe ghosts no they're
not symmetrical a ghost is never
required to explain any phenomena out
there anytime you hear a strange noise
at night when you're staying in an old
house the better explanation is that the
wood paneling is settling as the air
becomes colder at night it is not
that a spirit from the netherworld is
visiting you
in your room just as you're falling
asleep and nor is that smudge on the
photograph
evidence of a phantom from another
dimension
that is just a silver emulsion on old
film there are always better
explanations for these things but when
it comes to consciousness and when it
comes to free will we require those
things in order to explain stuff even if
we don't have a complete explanation yet
they're part of trying to frame the
question i would say to actually
formulate what the problem is whatever
the case today i'm just talking to david
briefly about the existence
of the laws of physics and what the
nature of that existence happens to be
so enjoy this question another thing
which which i think is still slightly
mysterious is
is what kind of an abstraction the laws
of physics are some people think
precisely by arguments such as such as
you've mentioned
there really are no laws of physics all
there are are physical events and
physical processes
and laws are just a kind way of
summarizing
physical events and processes they just
are
so because
i see that that looking out of the
window i can see that the sky is
cloudless at the moment that is some
kind of emergent consequence of the laws
of physics but
it if it's true
then
people who deny that there are laws of
physics will say well that's just a fact
about the universe and you could you
could summarize it and say that on three
of the four days of this week the the
sky was clear and that's not a law of
nature so why should we
why why should there be anything special
about
the statement that
nothing can exceed the speed of light
well it's because the statement that
nothing
exceeds the speed of light is not just a
prediction
it is an explanation it's an explanation
of how the universe is that the universe
is a four-dimensional
pseudo-romanian manifold with a metric
and and and so on and so on
and the fact that the speed of light is
finite
emerges from that
explanation
and you could write down
all the
predictions that follow from that
uh in a sort of infinitely long list of
things like like this dog can't run
faster than light and this car can't
travel faster than light and once you've
made that
infinitely long list or maybe just very
long very very long list you would have
written down everything that can be
deduced about
what happens in nature
but you wouldn't have
ever listed that law
and you wouldn't have ever mentioned
manifolds
and four-dimensional or anything like
that well you'd have some significant
explaining to do wouldn't you uh it well
if you wanted explanations you'd have a
lot of explaining to do you would in
fact have all the explaining
to do at the end of that huge process
that you had at the beginning you
wouldn't have explained anything
we were we were just talking about how
um the nature of
physical laws and whether or not and to
what extent they might be
pure abstractions or a kind of
abstraction of some kind and i was just
thinking out loud to myself that for
anyone who denies the existence of
physical laws in their own right laws of
physics
and to just say well there are just
facts of matter about the universe for
example
the orbits of planets going around stars
are approximately circular or elliptical
then those facts of the matter those
regularities in nature seem to be crying
out for
an explanation so to deny that there
would be really existing physical laws
behind those regularities of nature
seems to me to be going to a lot of work
to
uh avoid what might otherwise be called
occam's razor well isn't the simple
explanation there are physical laws out
there governing these things yes uh
of course if somebody insists on the
non-existence of explanations
like exactly like insistence on the
non-existence of anything
you can't be proved wrong
but i i think the the
motivation for denying the existence of
laws
is the old mistake of empiricism
it is the assumption that raw facts
or raw
sensory impressions
uh have a privileged status in that in
that we can access them directly uh
and this is the this people contrast
this with things like laws
and explanations in general
which they say we can't access directly
so so they are they have some kind of a
lesser reality and we can
in principle
not insist on their being real one can
insist on there not being real and it
doesn't make any difference
the the trouble with that is that
exactly the same is true of sense
impressions as well
and so this argument
that uh abstractions don't really exist
or that laws don't really exist and so
on
hidden in there
is the assumption that
sense impressions or that kind of thing
do really exist in some sense of really
which is itself a mistake that
all
knowledge is conjectural
all observations are theory laden
there is nothing that is an
authoritative source of knowledge
everything is conjecture
and so once you've realized that
everything is conjecture but that
knowledge can still exist
then the reason for making a distinction
between different kinds of existence
well no there is a distinction between
different kinds of existence but the the
justification the motivation
for denying that certain things exist
even if we need them in our explanations
goes away